A cloud network is virtual IT infrastructure managed by cloud service providers (CSPs), where network resources are supplied on demand in the form of private and public clouds. 

By creating a virtual environment within the cloud through an existing physical network, CSPs can perform network operations on the public cloud using individual client accounts. 

Cloud network security can be achieved in the following ways

▪ Virtual private cloud (VPC):
VPC is a secure and independent private cloud environment that resides within the public cloud. 

VPC clients can execute programs, host applications, save data, and perform anything they wish on a private network using their individual accounts, but the private cloud is hosted by the public cloud provider.

A VPC is generally independent from other VPCs running with the same account; hence, one PC client cannot view the traffic directed to another client’s VPCs

The client can also create an IPv6 block and add multiple subnets within that block. 

VPC can merge the scalability and other optimal features of public cloud computing with the data segregation of private cloud computing. 

VPC resources are available on demand and can be expanded and configured based on the requirement


▪ Public and private subnets: The subnets in VPC can be public or private. 

The virtual machines residing in the public subnet can transmit data packets directly over the web, while the VMs in a private subnet cannot. 

A public subnet consists of an outward path that transmits messages via an Internet Gateway (IGW), which allows IPv4 and IPv6 traffic from the VPC without any conditions on the bandwidth.

VMs in the public subnet can also receive inbound traffic via the IGW as long as their network ACLs and security groups permit it.

A private subnet can connect to the external web via a public network address translation (NAT) gateway. 

The routing device itself performs NAT. Additionally, NAT does not directly permit inward traffic from the web, which makes the subnet private. 

The external connectivity for the private subnet can also be created using VPN services


▪ Transit gateways: 
A transit gateway is a network routing solution that establishes and manages communication between an on-premises consumer network and VPCs via a centralized unit. 

This approach simplifies the network topology and eliminates complicated peering connections.

However, these communications can be allowed or blocked by cloud-specific ACLs depending on the port numbers and IP addresses of the hosts. 

Through the centralized unit, an administrator or network manager can have a clear picture of the entire network, even if device connections are made through a software-defined wide area network (SD-WAN)


▪ VPC endpoint: 
A VPC endpoint establishes a private connection between a VPC and another cloud service without access to the Internet, external gateways, NAT solutions, VPN connections, or public addresses. 

Therefore, the traffic between endpoints does not leave the organization’s network. 

The endpoints here are virtual computing devices. 

They are redundant, scalable, and highly available VPC elements that allow interaction between virtual machines in the VPC and cloud services without any bandwidth constraints or availability failures.

The following are the two types of VPC endpoints.

o Interface endpoint: 
It is an elastic network interface (ENI) that has a private IP address within the limit of a defined subnet.
It operates as an initial point of source for traffic towards a VPC or supported cloud services.

o Gateway-load-balancer endpoint:
It is also an ENI and operates as an initial point of source to impede traffic flow and divert it to a service that has been configured through a gateway load balancer, 
which is then used for security inspection





