Public Cloud 
In this model, the provider makes services such as applications, servers, and data storage available to the public over the Internet. 

Therefore, he is liable for the creation and constant maintenance of the public cloud and its IT resources.

Public cloud services may be free or based on a pay-per-usage model (e.g., Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), Google App Engine, Windows Azure Services Platform, IBM Bluemix).


 Private Cloud
A private cloud, also known as the internal or corporate cloud, is a cloud infrastructure operated by a single organization and implemented within a corporate firewall. 

Organizations deploy private cloud infrastructures to retain full control over corporate data (e.g., BMC Software, VMware vRealize Suite, SAP Cloud Platform).


▪ Community Cloud
It is a multi-tenant infrastructure shared among organizations from a specific community with common computing concerns, such as security, regulatory compliance, performance requirements, and jurisdiction. 

The community cloud can be either on-or off-premises and governed by the participated organizations or by a third-party managed service provider (e.g., Cisco Cloud Solutions, Salesforce Health Cloud.


 Hybrid Cloud
It is a cloud environment comprised of two or more clouds (private, public, or community) that remain unique entities but are bound together to offer the benefits of multiple deployment models.

In this model, the organization makes available and manages some resources in-house and provides other resources externally (e.g., Microsoft Azure, Zymr, Parangat Cloud Computing, Logicalis).


Multi Cloud
It is a dynamic heterogeneous environment that combines workloads across multiple cloud vendors that are managed via one proprietary interface to achieve long-term business goals. 

The multi cloud uses multiple computing and storage services from different cloud vendors. 

It distributes cloud assets, software, applications, etc. across various cloud-hosting environments. 

Multi cloud environments are mostly all-private, all-public or a combination of both. 

Organizations use multi cloud environments for distributing computing resources, thereby increasing computing power and storage capabilities, and limiting the data loss and downtime risk to a great extent (e.g., Microsoft Azure Arc, Google Cloud Anthos).


 Distributed Cloud
It is a centralized cloud environment comprised of geographically distributed public or private clouds controlled on a single control plane for providing services to the end users located on or off site.

In this model, the end user can access data anywhere as a local data center providing edge computing capability for improving data privacy and meeting local governance policies. 

It provides services to the end users as if they are accessing the remote data on their local server. 

Based on the requirement, the distributed cloud services can be used in different location types such as network, operator, and customer edges and as local data centers.

Distributed cloud provides service to the automation of applications such as artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and Internet of things (IoT) (e.g., Google Distributed Cloud and Cloudflare CDN).


 Poly Cloud
This type of cloud technology holds several types of cloud services, which can be supplied to different other clouds. 

Unlike a multi cloud, it provides features of various clouds on a single platform to provide users with features from different cloud services based on their requirement.

This model also helps users choose a specific feature required from each cloud to perform different tasks in their business environment. 

It provides specialized automation applications such as AI and ML services (e.g., Google Cloud Platform (GCP) and Amazon Web Services (AWS)).


















