Cloud security controls protect a cloud environment from any type of vulnerability and minimize the impacts of cyberattacks.

These controls may include practices, procedures, guidelines, and policies that are enforced to secure the cloud infrastructure.


▪ Cloud Application 
Security Cloud application security is a set of rules, processes, policies, controls, and techniques that administer all the data exchange between collaborative cloud platforms such as Box, Google Workspace, Slack, and Microsoft Office 365. 

If employees or users store and send data in cloud platforms over the long term, it is mandatory to include a cloud-based solution known as “safety net” in the zero-trust security implementation. 

Cloud application security is applied to only the application layers of SaaS, IaaS, and PaaS


▪ High Availability Across Zones
A cloud environment for an application should have high availability zones because it should allow application’s services to be continued even during intentional or unintentional network downtimes. 

High availability can be achieved by dividing servers into zones and maintaining network consistency across them. 

It enables the environment to handle failures in individual availability zones or the network without losing data. 

It also provides centralized management to monitor network operations and resource utilization

A cloud environment with high availability consists of two nodes: 
the master node and secondary node. The first server runs in the first availability zone, and the second server runs in secondary availability zone.

This environment is protected from various service outages such as disk failure, volume failure, network failure and zone failure. 

Here, each node is independent and has separate zones. 

If any node fails, a copy of its data is ensured to exist in the other node, which provides access to all the information


▪ Cloud Integration and Auditing
Cloud integration is the process of grouping multiple cloud environments together in the form of a public or hybrid cloud that enables administrators to continuously access and handle systems, services, data, and applications. 

It also combines a cloud environment with the on-premises environment.

Without cloud integration, administrators need to perform each integration task independently and manually, which is a time consuming and error-prone process. 

While risk indicators for on-premises networks are generally detected in network or application logs, cloud-based risk indicators are obtained from API logs. 

Therefore, all the services should be integrated according to the defined security policies or guidelines and audited further to achieve security compliance

Cloud integration mechanisms provide a comprehensive view over all of the organization’s data, enhance connectivity, and help in gathering all the indicators of risk for assessment.

Cloud auditing is the process of analyzing the services offered by cloud providers and verifying the conformity to privacy, security, and performance requirements for the cloud environment.

Cloud security audits must address the problems associated with both conventional and cloud infrastructure.

Proper auditing can ensure the availability of services to the clients under all conditions in an organized and comprehensive manner.

It also offers automated data collection on security and operations for systematic evaluation and comparison. 


▪ Security Groups 
A security group is a basic security measure implemented in cloud infrastructure to provide security to virtual instances. 

It serves as a security solution for virtual machines. 

The security group is located between the Internet and virtual instances, and it controls the inbound and outbound traffic. 

A properly configured security group prevents denial-of-service (DoS) attacks and unauthorized access to IT resources


▪ Instance Awareness
The cloud-based kill chain model describes the possibilities of using fake cloud instances for command and control to exfiltrate data from a cloud environment. 

Many security solutions such as firewalls, gateways, and other cloud security tools are incapable of fighting these threats because they cannot trace the differences between instances of cloud applications.

Attackers often take advantage of this incapability when targeting cloud networks. 

Hence, it is necessary to use tools that are aware of or can differentiate cloud instances such as Google Drive and OneDrive to protect against cloud-based threats such as data exfiltration and SaaS phishing





