A cluster refers to a set of two or more connected nodes that run parallelly to complete a task. Workloads with individual, parallelizable tasks are shared among the nodes.

These tasks utilize the combined memory and computational power of all the nodes in a cluster.

One of the nodes acts as a master node, which is responsible for allocating the work, retrieving the results, and giving a response.

Types of Cluster Computing Given below are the different types of clusters. 
o Highly Available (HA) or Fail-over: In a fail-over cluster, more than one node runs simultaneously to offer high availability (HA) or continuous availability (CA).
If one node fails, the other node assumes its responsibility with minimum or no downtime.

o Load Balancing: In a load-balancing cluster, the workload is distributed among the nodes to avoid overstressing a single node. 
The load balancer performs periodic health checks on each node to identify node failures and reroutes the incoming traffic to another node. 
A load-balancing cluster is also a highly available cluster.

o High-Performance Computing: 
In a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster, the nodes are configured to provide extreme performance by parallelizing the tasks. Scaling also helps in maximizing performance.

Clusters in the Cloud
Clusters in the cloud are sets of nodes hosted on virtual machines (VMs) and are often coupled with virtual private clouds.

Cloud clustering minimizes the effort and time required to establish a cluster. 

In a cloud environment, the clusters can be scaled up on demand by adding additional resources or instances such as VMs easily.

The cloud also provides the flexibility of upgrading infrastructure according to changes in requirements. 

Furthermore, the cloud enhances latency and resiliency via node deployment in many availability zones. 

Cloud clustering maximizes the cluster’s availability, security, and maintainability.


Containers and their relationship with Clusters
Containers help in running applications reliably under different computing environments. 

For instance, an organization develops a web application building the frontend and backend as microservices.

To deploy this web application, containers can be pushed onto a VM in the cloud.

If either the VM or the hardware fails, then the application is inaccessible until traffic is handled by a fail-over server.

To enhance the availability, scalability, and performance of web applications, push the containerized applications onto several nodes in a cluster.

Consequently, containers running on various nodes maximize resource utilization. 

Moreover, the risk of single-node failure can be eliminated by placing an instance of a container on every node in a cluster.


Container Management Platforms 
Portainer is the most versatile container management tool that simplifies secure adoption of containers at a remarkable speed irrespective of the industry, orchestration platform, or computing device. 

Portainer makes it easy for cloud administrators to set up, maintain and troubleshoot container infrastructure in public clouds and datacenters.













