The massive growth in IoT devices worldwide has resulted in the production of an enormous amount of data by these devices. 

To meet the growing demand for analyzing and processing these data, the implementation of fog computing, along with cloud computing, is an ideal solution. 

Fog computing is a distributed and independent digital environment in which the applications and data storage are positioned between data sources (devices generating data) and the cloud service.

Fog computing is an extended version of cloud computing that comprises multiple edge nodes that are directly connected to physical devices to enable service access to the end users.

Generally, fog refers to the idea of creating an individual layer in distributed network infrastructure that has close inter-connections with IoT and cloud computing. 

It acts as an intermediary between the hardware and remote servers, and it is also called an intelligent gateway. 

Fog can be used for enhanced data processing, storage, and analysis in a quick and efficient manner. 

Many organizations have adopted this technology as it can provide additional functionalities for quick and efficient data processing, storage, and analysis.


Working of Fog Computing 
Devices with an Internet connection, computational abilities, and data storage are referred to as nodes of fog. 

Fog nodes can be deployed anywhere in a network. The IoT applications for fog nodes are ported at the network edge. 

The fog nodes close to the network edge take data from IoT devices, enabling short-term analytics at the edge. 

Fog computing can be very beneficial in case of an unstable Internet connection. 

Urgent requests are transmitted directly into the fog and are processed in real time in the local network. 

Fog computing can be used in applications such as smart cities, smart grids, connected cars, and real-time analytics.



**Edge Computing**

Conventional cloud computing has some issues related to data security, low performance, and increased data storage, which lead to high operational costs.

These issues can be solved by replacing conventional cloud computing with edge computing.

Edge computing is a subset of fog computing, and its approach to data processing is similar to that of fog computing. 

In fog computing, the intelligent gateway performs processing at the LAN, whereas in edge computing, the edge gateway intelligence is performed in devices such as programmable automation controllers. 

Edge computing is used in solutions that require the processing of small and urgent operations within a timespan of milliseconds. 

Edge computing is a distributed, decentralized computing model in which computation and data processing are performed close to edge devices. 

It stores data at locations close to the devices from which the data were collected, instead of trusting a central location to store the data. 

It also reduces the Internet bandwidth usage and data offload. 

Many organizations can utilize this technology for building automation systems for fast processing, prompt responses, and efficient real-time applications.













