Cloud Consumer
A cloud consumer is a person or organization that maintains a business relationship with the cloud service providers (CSPs) and utilizes the cloud computing services. 

The cloud consumer browses the CSP’s service catalog requests for the desired services, sets up service contracts with the CSP (either directly or via cloud broker), and uses the services. 

The CSP bills the consumer based on the services provided. 

The CSP should fulfill the service level agreement (SLA) in which the cloud consumer specifies the technical performance requirements, such as the quality of service, security, and remedies for performance failure. 

The CSP may also define limitations and obligations if any, that cloud consumers must accept.

The services available to a cloud consumer in the PaaS, IaaS, and SaaS models are as follows:
o PaaS – database (DB), business intelligence, application deployment, development and testing, and integration
o IaaS – storage, services management, content delivery network (CDN), platform hosting, backup and recovery, and computing
o SaaS – human resources, enterprise resource planning (ERP), sales, customer relationship management (CRM), collaboration, document management, email and office productivity, content management, financial services, and social networks


▪ Cloud Provider
A cloud provider is a person or organization who acquires and manages the computing infrastructure intended for providing services (directly or via a cloud broker) to interested parties via network access.


▪ Cloud Carrier
A cloud carrier acts as an intermediary that provides connectivity and transport services between CSPs and cloud consumers. 
The cloud carrier provides access to consumers via a network, telecommunication, or other access devices.


▪ Cloud Auditor
A cloud auditor is a party that performs an independent examination of cloud service controls to express an opinion thereon.

Audits verify adherence to standards through a review of the objective evidence.

A cloud auditor can evaluate the services provided by a CSP regarding security controls (management, operational, and technical safeguards intended to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the system and its information), 
privacy impact (compliance with applicable privacy laws and regulations governing an individual’s privacy), performance, etc


▪ Cloud Broker
The integration of cloud services is becoming too complicated for cloud consumers to manage. 
Thus, a cloud consumer may request cloud services from a cloud broker, rather than directly contacting a CSP. 
The cloud broker is an entity that manages cloud services regarding use, performance, and delivery and maintains the relationship between CSPs and cloud consumers.
The services provided by cloud brokers fall in three categories: 

o Service Intermediation Improves a given function by a specific capability and provides value-added services to cloud consumers.
o Service Aggregation Combines and integrates multiple services into one or more new services.
o Service Arbitrage Similar to service aggregation but without the fixing of the aggregated services (the cloud broker can choose services from multiple agencies).


















