Service Hijacking using Social Engineering

In account or service hijacking, an attacker steals the credentials of a CSP or a client by phishing, pharming, social engineering, and exploitation of software vulnerabilities. 

Using the stolen credentials, the attacker gains access to the cloud computing services and compromises data confidentiality, integrity, and availability.

Social engineering is a nontechnical kind of intrusion that relies heavily on human interaction and often involves tricking others to break routine security procedures.

Attackers might target CSPs to reset passwords or IT staff to access their cloud services to reveal passwords. 

Other ways to obtain passwords include password guessing, keylogging malware, implementing password-cracking techniques, and sending phishing emails.

Social engineering attacks result in exposed customer and credit card data, personal information, business plans, staff data, identity theft, etc.

the attacker first creates a fake cloud service login page and sends a malicious link to the cloud service user. 

The user, on receiving the link, clicks on it and enters his/her login credentials, failing to notice it is a fake login page.

When the user hits enter, the attacker receives the login credentials of the user, while the page automatically redirects him to the original cloud service login page.

Now, the attacker uses the stolen user credentials to log in to the cloud service and perform malicious activity

Countermeasures: 
▪ Do not share account credentials between users and services. 
▪ Implement a robust two-factor or multi-factor authentication mechanism wherever possible.
▪ Train the staff to recognize social engineering attacks. 
▪ Strictly follow the security policies framed


Service Hijacking using Network Sniffing
Network sniffing involves the interception and monitoring of network traffic between two cloud nodes.

Unencrypted sensitive data (e.g., login credentials) during transmission across a network are at high risk. 

Attackers use packet sniffers (e.g., Wireshark) to capture sensitive data, such as passwords and session cookies, and other web service-related security configuration data, 
such as the universal description discovery and integrity (UDDI), simple object access protocol (SOAP), and web service description language (WSDL) files.

when a user enters login credentials to access cloud services, an attacker can sniff the credentials/cookies during their transmission across a network using packet sniffers, 
such as Wireshark and Capsa Portable Network Analyzer.

The attacker then logs into the cloud services via the stolen credentials.

Countermeasures: 
▪ Encrypt sensitive data over the network. 
▪ Encrypt sensitive data in configuration files. 
▪ Detect network interface controllers (NICs) running in promiscuous mode













