 Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) 
This cloud computing service enables subscribers to use on-demand fundamental IT resources, such as computing power, virtualization, data storage, and network.

This service provides virtual machines and other abstracted hardware and operating systems (OSs), which may be controlled through a service application programming interface (API).

As cloud service providers are responsible for managing the underlying cloud computing infrastructure, subscribers can avoid costs of human capital, hardware, and others (e.g., Amazon EC2, Microsoft OneDrive, Rackspace)


 Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)
This type of cloud computing service allows for the development of applications and services. 

Subscribers need not buy and manage the software and infrastructure underneath it but have authority over deployed applications and perhaps application hosting environment configurations. 

This offers development tools, configuration management, and deployment platforms on-demand, which can be used by subscribers to develop custom applications (e.g., Google App Engine, Salesforce, Microsoft Azure). 

Advantages of writing applications in the PaaS environment include dynamic scalability, automated backups, and other platform services, without the need to explicitly code for them


Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)
This cloud computing service offers application software to subscribers on-demand over the Internet. 

The provider charges for the service on a pay-per-use basis, by subscription, by advertising, or by sharing among multiple users (e.g., web-based office applications like Google Docs or Calendar, Salesforce CRM, and Freshbooks).


 Identity-as-a-Service (IDaaS)
This cloud computing service offers authentication services to the subscribed enterprises and is managed by a third-party vendor to provide identity and access management services. 

It provides services such as Single-Sign-On (SSO), Multi-Factor-Authentication (MFA), Identity Governance and Administration (IGA), access management, and intelligence collection.

These services allow subscribers to access sensitive data more securely both on and off-premises (e.g., OneLogin, Centrify Identity Service, Microsoft Azure Active Directory, Okta).


Security-as-a-Service (SECaaS)
This cloud computing model integrates security services into corporate infrastructure in a cost-effective way. 

It is developed based on SaaS and does not require any physical hardware or equipment. 

Therefore, it drastically reduces the cost compared to that spent when organizations establish their own security capabilities. 

It provides services such as penetration testing, authentication, intrusion detection, anti-malware, security incident and event management (e.g., eSentire MDR, Switchfast Technologies, OneNeck IT Solutions, Foundstone Managed Security Services).


Container-as-a-Service (CaaS)
This cloud computing model provides containers and clusters as a service to its subscribers.

It provides services such as virtualization of container engines, management of containers, applications, and clusters through a web portal, or an API.

Using these services, subscribers can develop rich scalable containerized applications through the cloud or on-site data centers.

CaaS inherits features of both IaaS and PaaS (e.g., Amazon EC2, Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)).


Function-as-a-Service (FaaS)
This cloud computing service provides a platform for developing, running, and managing application functionalities without the complexity of building and maintaining necessary infrastructure (serverless architecture). 

This model is mostly used while developing applications for microservices. 

It provides on-demand functionality to the subscribers that powers off the supporting infrastructure and incurs no charges when not in use.

It provides data processing services, such as Internet of Things (IoT) services for connected devices, mobile and web applications, and batch-and-stream processing (e.g., AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, Microsoft Azure Functions, Oracle Functions).


Anything-as-a-Service (XaaS)
Anything as a service or everything as a service (XaaS) is a cloud-computing and remote-access service that offers anything as a service over the Internet based on the user’s demand.

The service may include digital products such as tools, applications, and technologies, as well as other types of services such as food, transportation, and medical consultations.

The service is paid as per usage and cannot be purchased or licensed as regular products. 

Apart from common cloud services such as software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS), and infrastructure as a service (IaaS), XaaS includes services such as
network as a service (NaaS), storage as a service (STaaS), testing as a service (TaaS), malware as a service (MaaS), and disaster recovery as a service (DRaaS).

XaaS offers secure services such as customer relationship management (CRM), cloud computing, and directory services (e.g., NetApp, AWS Elastic Beanstalk, Heroku, and Apache Stratos)


Firewalls-as-a-Service (FWaaS)
This cloud computing service protects users and organizations from both internal and external threats by filtering the network traffic. 

FWaaS includes enhanced data analysis capabilities, including the ability to detect malware attacks, in addition to security functionality such as packet filtering, network analyzing, and IPsec (e.g., Zscaler Cloud Firewall, SecurityHQ, Secucloud, Fortinet, Cisco, and Sophos)


Desktop-as-a-Service (DaaS)
This cloud computing service offers on-demand virtual desktops and apps to subscribers. 

Cloud service providers are responsible for providing infrastructure, computing power, data storage, backup, patching, and maintenance. 

Cloud providers deliver DaaS as a multi-tenancy subscription.

The provider charges for the service with a predictable pay-as-you-need model (e.g., Amazon WorkSpaces, Citrix Managed Desktops, and Azure Windows Virtual Desktop)


Mobile Backend-as-a-Service (MBaaS)
This cloud computing service allows app developers to integrate their front-end applications with backend infrastructure through an application programming interface (API) and software development kit (SDK).

This service reduces the time developers spend on developing backend functionality. 

It provides user management, push notifications, cloud storage, database management, and geolocation to develop applications (e.g., Google’s Firebase, AWS Amplify, Kinvey, Apple’s CloudKit, and Backendless Cloud


Machines-as-a-Service (MaaS) Business Model
This type of cloud computing model, also known as Equipment-as-a-Service (EaaS), allows manufacturers to sell or lease machines to clients and receive a percentage of profits generated by those machines. 

This model is extensively utilized and implemented to benefit both manufactures as well as clients. 

It is a sophisticated cloud model that allows the client and manufacturer to generate and track real-time products from the machine.

















